Add internal solution for ceoi-11-bal (Balloons) with cpp and java code [ceoi11] (#2952)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/ceoi-11-bal.mdx

---
id: ceoi-11-bal
source: CEOI 2011
title: Balloons
author: Chuyang Wang
---

[Official Analysis](https://oi.edu.pl/static/attachment/20110713/ceoi-2011.pdf#page=11)

## Explanation

> The problem can be solved by simulation. In particular, we want to inflate the balloons from left to right. The difficulty is to find out when the new balloon $b$ touches one of the inflated balloon $a$ on its left, and how to check this for all previous inflated balloons efficiently. For notation, $a_r$ is the radius and $a_x$ the x-coordinate of balloon $a$. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The problem can be solved by simulation. In particular, we want to inflate the balloons from left to right. The difficult part is to find out when the new balloon $b$ touches one of the inflated balloon $a$ on its left, and how to check this for all previous inflated balloons efficiently. For notation, $a_r$ is the radius and $a_x$ the x-coordinate of balloon $a$. 
```
?

Since we remove the element from the stack once we want to check further back, we have a time complexity of $\mathcal{O}(n)$.  

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>
## Implementation

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

const int PRECISION = 3;

/*
 * how long can the radius of the new balloon at position bx be
 * so that it touches the ballon a, which is described by
 * its x position a.first and its radius a.second
 */
double calc_r(pair<double, double> a, double bx) {
	return (a.first - bx) * (a.first - bx) / (4 * a.second);
}

int main() {

> 	// number of balloons

Reviewer: dont state the obvious yo

	int n;
	cin >> n;

	// the radius of each balloon after inflating

> 	vector<double> res(n);

Reviewer: maybe a better variable name than `res`?

	// the balloons we should check when we add a new one
	stack<pair<double, double>> to_check;

	// simulate inflating balloons
	for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
		/*

> 		 * the x coordinate and the maximum radius of the

Reviewer: unnecessary comment

With this information, we could just check every previous inflated balloon and determine what the maximum radius of our current balloon is. This, however, has the time complexity of $\mathcal{O}(n^2)$, which is too slow. Instead, we make use of our observation that any balloon $i$ with $i_r \leq b_r$ and $i_x < b_x$ will never be touched by balloons after $b$. Therefore, we store inflated balloons in a stack. Each time when we want to inflate a new balloon $b$, we check how long the radius of $b$ can be under the constraint of the first element $a$ from the stack. (Certainly, $b_r$ should still be less than the given maximum $r$. ) If $b_r \geq a_r$, we pop $a$ out from the stack and check the next element. $a$ will never be checked again. Otherwise, if $b_r < a_r$, we can stop the check and store our newly inflated balloon $b$ into this stack. 

Since we remove the element from the stack once we want to check further back, we have a time complexity of $\mathcal{O}(n)$.  

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>
## Implementation

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

using ll = long long;

> using ld = long double;

Reviewer 2: try just using `double`?

		 * if the last balloon makes the radius of the current balloon smaller
		 */
		while (!to_check.empty())
		{
			pair<ld, ld> last = to_check.top();
			// the radius if the current balloon touches the last balloon
			ld to_last_r = calc_r(last, x);
			/*
			 * the maximum possible radius is the smaller one between current 
			 * maximum and the maximum radius so that we touches the last balloon
			 * (by which we have to stop)
			 */
			max_r = min(max_r, to_last_r);

			/*
			 * if current maximum radius >= radius of the last balloon, we can
			 * remove the last balloon since it will never be touched by any
			 * new balloons other than the current one
			 */
			if (max_r >= last.second)
			{
				to_check.pop();
				// check the next balloon saved which will possibly reduce max_r
				continue;
			}
			/*
			 * otherwise, the current balloon is smaller than the last saved balloon
			 * and we can stop checking
			 */
			else
			{
				break;
			}
		}
		/*
		 * save the x coordinate and radius of the current balloon, so that
		 * it can be checked later when a new balloon being inflated
		 */
		to_check.push({x, max_r});

		res[i] = max_r;
	}

	cout << fixed << setprecision(3);

> 	for (auto &r : res)

Reviewer 2: i wouldn't use `auto` here

		// simulate inflating balloons
		for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
			/*
			 * the x coordinate and the maximum radius of the
			 * current balloon being inflated
			 */
			StringTokenizer st = new StringTokenizer(br.readLine());
			long x = Integer.parseInt(st.nextToken());
			double r = Integer.parseInt(st.nextToken());

			// the maximum radius of the current balloon
			double maxR = r;
			/*
			 * as long as the stack is not empty, we want to check
			 * if the last balloon makes the radius of the current balloon smaller
			 */
			while (!toCheck.isEmpty()) {
				// the radius if the current balloon touches the last balloon
				double toLastR = toCheck.peek().calcR(x);
				/*
				 * the maximum possible radius is the smaller one between current
				 * maximum and the maximum radius so that we touches the last
				 * balloon (by which we have to stop)
				 */
				maxR = Math.min(maxR, toLastR);

				/*
				 * if current maximum radius >= radius of the last balloon, we can
				 * remove the last balloon since it will never be touched by any
				 * new balloons other than the current one
				 */
				if (maxR >= toCheck.peek().r) {
					toCheck.pop();

> 					// check the next balloon saved which will possibly reduce max_r

Reviewer 2: over 80 chars?

Author: actually only 75, but i could split it to two lines if preferred

Reviewer 2: yeah nvm

	}

> 	cout << fixed << setprecision(3);

Reviewer 2: put `3` in a constant called `PRECISION`
